---
title: 'Choosing acquisition settings'
teaching: 35
exercises: 20
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions 

- What are the key factors to consider when choosing acquisition settings?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Explain some examples of acquisition settings, and factors to consider when 
choosing them

- Explain the difference between resolution and pixel size

- Describe some quality control steps e.g. monitoring the image histogram

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

In the last episode we looked at some of the main steps to designing a light 
microscopy experiment:

1. Define your research question

2. Define what you need to observe to answer that question

3. Define what you need to measure to answer that question

4. Choose a light microscopy method that fits your data needs

5. Choose acquisition settings that fit your data needs

In this episode, we'll focus on the last step - choosing acquisition settings - 
as well as looking at some early quality control steps.

## Acquisition settings

Once you've chosen a light microscope to use, there are a wide variety of 
acquisition settings that can be adjusted. Acquisition settings commonly 
optimised for an experiment include magnification, laser power, and exposure 
time, but there are many others. Different combinations of settings will be best 
for different samples and research questions. For example, one combination of 
settings may be best for rapid live cell imaging, while another may be best for 
high resolution imaging of fixed samples.

There are many different factors that are affected by acquisition settings, but 
here are some of the main ones to consider.

## Spatial resolution

Spatial resolution is defined as the smallest distance between two adjacent 
points on a sample that can still be seen as separate entities. In 2D, this is 
measured in x and y, while in 3D it is measured in x, y and z. For example, a 
resolution of one micrometre would mean that objects less than one micrometre 
apart couldn't be identified separately (i.e. they would appear as one object).

Spatial resolution is affected by many factors including the wavelength of light 
and the [numerical aperture (NA)
](https://www.microscopyu.com/microscopy-basics/numerical-aperture) of the 
objective lens. Using a shorter wavelength of light and higher NA lenses, can 
provide higher resolution images.

Spatial resolution can be isotropic (the same in all directions) or anisotropic 
(different in different directions). Anisotropic resolution is common with 3D 
datasets, where the x/y resolution tends to be better than the z resolution.

We'll look at spatial resolution in more detail [later in this episode
](#resolution-vs-pixel-size).

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

## Spatial resolution and optical resolution

In this episode, we use 'spatial resolution' to refer to the resolution limits 
of the light microscope. Note that sometimes 'spatial resolution' is also used 
to refer to the final image pixel size (as we will look at [later in this 
episode](#resolution-vs-pixel-size)). Due to this ambiguity, you may also see 
the microscope's resolution referred to as 'optical resolution' to clearly 
distinguish it from pixel size.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::



## Temporal resolution

Temporal (or time) resolution, is how fast images can be acquired (usually 
measured in seconds or milliseconds). This is mainly controlled by the 
'exposure time', which is the length of time over which the detector collects 
light for each image. For a laser scanning confocal microscope, you will instead 
see a 'dwell time' - this is the time the laser spends illuminating each 
position on the sample. Decreasing exposure time / dwell time will result in 
faster overall imaging speeds.

The imaging speed will also depend on some of the mechanical properties of your 
chosen light microscope. For example, the speed with which a laser-scanning 
confocal can move the laser across a sample, or (if imaging multiple locations) 
the speed of the microscope stage movement.

To produce good quality images (with a high signal-to-noise ratio, 
[as we'll look at later](#signal-to-noise-ratio)), the detector needs to collect 
as much light as possible in these short timescales.

## Field of view

The field of view is the size of the area you can view with your light 
microscope. It is often measured as a diameter in millimetres. A larger field of 
view is useful if you want to, for example, observe a large number of cells at 
the same time. This can quickly increase your sample size, providing 
improved statistical power (as covered in the [last episode
](designing-a-light-microscopy-experiment.md#define-what-you-need-to-measure)).

The field of view is affected by many factors but, importantly, is directly 
related to the magnification of the objective lens. Higher levels of 
magnification result in a smaller field of view.

To image areas larger than the field of view, you will need to acquire multiple 
images at different positions by moving the microscope's stage. These images can 
then be stitched together (often with the microscope manufacturer's acquisition 
software), to give one large final image. This method can provide high 
resolution images of large areas, but also slows down overall acquisition times.

## Depth penetration

Depth penetration refers to the distance light can penetrate into your sample 
(in the z direction). It therefore controls the maximum z range that you can 
image over - for example, a specific confocal microscope may be limited to a 
maximum depth of 50 micrometre. 

Depth penetration is limited due to samples absorbing and scattering light that 
passes through them. Various factors control the penetration depth - for 
example, the density of the sample and the wavelength of light used during 
imaging. Various [tissue clearing
](https://www.nature.com/articles/s43586-021-00080-9) methods exist that can 
help to make a sample more transparent, and allow imaging at greater depths. 
Also, the use of longer wavelengths of light can reduce absorption/scattering 
and increase depth penetration. This comes at the cost of decreased spatial 
resolution (as we covered in the [spatial resolution section
](#spatial-resolution)). For very thick samples, you will likely need to use a 
microscope specialised for this task e.g. a [multiphoton microscope
](https://www.microscopyu.com/techniques/multi-photon/multiphoton-microscopy).

## Data size

It's important to consider the overall size of your imaging data (e.g. in 
megabytes (MB), gigabytes (GB) or terabytes (TB)). Light microscopy datasets can 
be extremely large in size, so you will have to make sure you have appropriate 
file storage space that is regularly backed up.

The overall size of your data will depend on many factors. For example, 
increasing your resolution will increase the size of your final images, 
especially if you are covering a large area by stitching multiple images taken 
at different positions together.

## Light exposure (i.e phototoxicity / photobleaching)

Illuminating our samples with light is an essential part of collecting light 
microscopy images. However, we must also be mindful of the detrimental effects 
light can have on our samples, especially at high intensity over long time 
periods. 

Photobleaching is a key issue for fluorescence microscopy. If a fluorophore is 
exposed to intense light, its structure can degrade over time. This means that 
it will eventually stop fluorescing entirely.

Another issue is phototoxicity. Light exposure can damage cells resulting in 
unexpected changes in cell behaviour, morphology and eventually cell death.

Reducing the effects of photobleaching and phototoxicity requires minimising the 
light exposure of our samples as much as possible. Light exposure can be 
reduced through many methods, including reducing light/laser power, reducing 
exposure time/dwell time, and imaging at lower temporal resolution.

## Signal to noise ratio

Signal to noise ratio is a very useful measure of image quality - in general, it 
will be easier to identify and measure features of interest in images with a 
higher signal to noise ratio.

The 'signal' is what we really want to measure - for example, for a fluorescence 
microscopy image, this would be the light emitted by fluorophores in the sample. 
In an ideal world the detector would perfectly measure the light intensity, but 
this isn't really possible. The values the detector records will always be 
affected by random fluctuations called 'noise' (see the ['where does noise 
come from?'](#where-does-noise-come-from) section for more information). This 
noise usually appears as a random 'graininess' over the image and can make 
details difficult to see.

![](fig/image-with-noise.png){alt="Left - the nuclei from Napari's Cells 
(3D+2Ch) sample image. Right - same image with added gaussian noise, a seemingly 
random pattern of bright and dark pixels now obscure the image."}

To identify and measure our features of interest, the absolute size of the 
signal and noise are less important than the ratio between them. For example, 
imagine we are trying to distinguish between two areas with different brightness 
- one being 1.5x brighter than the other. In a low signal setup where values are 
small (say 20 vs 30) adding noise can make these areas very difficult to 
separate. For example, see the diagram below which shows three histograms. The 
left is the ideal scenario, where there is no noise, and we perfectly see one 
value of 20 and one of 30. The middle shows the addition of some noise to each 
value, resulting in wider distributions that overlap extensively. This means 
that in the combined histogram of these values (right) it becomes impossible to 
clearly distinguish these two values. Note - here the added noise is a gaussian 
distribution centred on each value (i.e. 20 and 30) with a standard deviation of 
10 and 1000 samples - you can read more about gaussian noise in the [noise chapter
](https://bioimagebook.github.io/chapters/3-fluorescence/3-formation_noise/formation_noise.html) 
of Pete Bankhead's bioimage book.

![](fig/snr-comparison-low.png){alt="Left - histogram with no noise, two 
vertical lines are displayed at pixel values of 20 and 30. Middle - histogram 
with added noise. The two lines are now expanded into broader, overlapping peaks 
(shown in different colours). Right - Same as the middle histogram, but with 
peaks displayed in the same colour. Due to their large overlap, they appear as 
one combined peak."}

If we imagine a scenario with higher signal, now values of 80 and 120 (one still 
1.5x higher than the other), then we can see that adding the same level of noise 
has less effect. As the values are now higher and further apart, the broadening 
of their distributions only causes them to overlap slightly. We can still 
clearly distinguish the values in the combined histogram on the right. This 
demonstrates how increasing the signal to noise ratio can improve our ability to 
recognise and measure different features.

![](fig/snr-comparison-high.png){alt="Left - histogram with no noise, two 
vertical lines are displayed at pixel values of 80 and 120. Middle - histogram 
with added noise. The two lines are now expanded into broader, slightly 
overlapping peaks (shown in different colours). Right - Same as the middle 
histogram, but with peaks displayed in the same colour. Due to their small 
overlap, they can still be distinguished as two separate peaks."}

How can we improve the signal to noise ratio of our images? The main solution is 
to increase the amount of light that we detect per image, by adjusting our 
acquisition settings. For example:

- increase light/laser power
- increase exposure time / dwell time
- Use [binning
](https://bioimagebook.github.io/chapters/3-fluorescence/4-microscope_types/microscope_types.html#sec-detectors-binning) 
(this combines multiple pixels into a single larger pixel)
- Average multiple images

If you want to find out more about noise, we recommend the [noise chapter
](https://bioimagebook.github.io/chapters/3-fluorescence/3-formation_noise/formation_noise.html) 
of Pete Bankhead's bioimage book.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

### Where does noise come from?

Noise comes from many sources - for example, 'photon noise' (also known as 'shot 
noise') is a key source. Photon noise is caused by inherent statistical 
fluctuations in the emission of photons (individual light 'packets'). For 
example, consider a fluorescence microscopy experiment where photons of light 
are being emitted from a fluorescent label. Even though the average rate of 
emission is constant, the exact number of photons emitted in a specific time 
interval (say 30 seconds) will vary each time. Say 20 photons, then 18, then 
22... The exact time a photon is emitted is random, so there will always be 
random variations. These follow a statistical distribution known as a 'poisson 
distribution' - if you're interested in the details Pete Bankhead's bioimage 
book has a great chapter on [noise
](https://bioimagebook.github.io/chapters/3-fluorescence/3-formation_noise/formation_noise.html).

The important point to consider is that there will always be some photon noise. 
It is inherit noise in the emission of light, and therefore not dependent on a 
particular microscope or detector setup.

Other types of noise are dependent on the microscope itself, often associated 
with the kind of detector used. For example, 'read noise' and 'dark noise' are 
commonly associated with [CCD (charge-coupled device) cameras
](https://www.microscopyu.com/tutorials/ccd-signal-to-noise-ratio). These types 
of noise relate to slight inaccuracies in quantifying the number of photons that 
hit the detector - no detector is perfect, so there will always be some variation.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Optimising acquisition settings

In an ideal world we could produce the 'perfect' image that optimised for all of 
the features above: high spatial resolution, high temporal resolution, large 
field of view, large depth penetration, small data size, low light exposure and 
high signal to noise ratio. This is never possible though! There are always 
trade-offs and compromises to be made. These different factors are 
inter-related, usually meaning that optimising for one will be at the expense of 
the others. For example, increasing spatial resolution requires a reduced field 
of view, and it will increase the overall data size. As each pixel covers a 
smaller area, resulting in less signal per pixel, you will likely need to 
increase light exposure to achieve a comparable signal to noise ratio. This may 
mean using higher light intensity, or imaging more slowly (with increased dwell 
time/exposure time).

![](fig/acquisition-tradeoffs.png){alt="An increase in spatial resolution may 
require: decreased temporal resolution, decreased field of view, increased data 
size, increased light exposure, and decreased signal to noise ratio." width="80%"}

Different microscopes will provide different ranges for these features - for 
example, supporting different ranges of spatial or temporal resolution, or 
providing detectors with different sensitivity that require higher or lower 
light intensity. Acquisition settings then allow you to fine-tune how that 
microscope functions, optimising within these ranges for your particular sample 
and research question. For example, do you need to prioritise temporal 
resolution for a highly dynamic process? Or perhaps is spatial resolution the 
priority, as your region of interest is very small? 

[Jonkman et al.'s 2020 paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41596-020-0313-9) 
provides some great advice for choosing confocal microscopes and acquisition 
settings, with figure 5 as a great example of the different trade-offs.


::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge 

## Choosing acquisiton settings

In the previous episode, we used an example of investigating the effects of a 
specific chemical on cells grown in culture. Continuing with this, which 
acquisition settings would we need to prioritise to answer our research 
question? - 'Does the chemical affect the number, size or shape of cell nuclei 
over time?'

Think about the points above and the trade-offs between them to make a list of 
potential answers. It may be best to discuss in a group, so you can share 
different ideas.

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution 

### Solution

There's no one correct answer here, as it will depend on which type of light 
microscope you are using and which aspects of nucleus size and shape you want to 
focus on. Here are some points to consider though:

### Light exposure

As we are interested in how the nuclei number, shape and size changes over time, 
we will need to use live cell imaging. Light exposure (photobleaching / 
phototoxicity) can be a huge issue for these long experiments where cells must 
be exposed to light again and again. Therefore, to image for as long as 
possible, we should try to reduce light exposure as much as possible. This may 
require using lower resolution, lower light/laser power and shorter exposure 
times. We must balance this against signal to noise ratio though.

### Data size and spatial resolution

As we are taking many images over a long timescale, our data size could become 
very large. To minimise this, we should make sure we are using the lowest 
spatial resolution possible (that still lets us see individual nucleus 
size/shape). Usually this means selecting a lower NA objective lens (which is 
usually also a lower magnification objective lens). 

Also, we should ensure we are using an appropriate interval between 
our images. For example, do you need an image every minute? Or is every ten 
minutes fine? Longer intervals will reduce the size of your final dataset.

### Temporal resolution

If we are only interested in measuring overall changes in the mean nucleus 
number / size / shape, we can afford to have quite large intervals between our 
images (low temporal resolution). If we instead wanted to track the progress of 
individual nuclei over time (e.g. their movements and individual divisions), we 
would need much smaller intervals (higher temporal resolution).

### Field of view

We will need to keep the field of view large enough to image many nuclei at once 
- this will give us a good estimate of the average nuclei number / shape / size. 
This means we should use the lowest magnification objective lens that still 
provides enough spatial resolution to see individual nuclei. Alternatively, we 
will need to stitch images together from multiple positions - although this will 
slow down acquisition, and must be balanced against the required temporal 
resolution!

### Depth penetration

As we are considering cells grown in culture (rather than in thick tissues), 
depth penetration isn't a key concern here. This means we shouldn't have to, for 
example, limit ourselves to fluorophores with longer emission wavelengths, or 
require any additional preparation steps like tissue clearing.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Resolution vs pixel size

Let's dive deeper into choosing an appropriate spatial resolution for your 
experiment. First, let's clarify the differences between magnification, pixel 
size and spatial resolution.

### Spatial resolution 

As [defined above](#spatial-resolution), spatial resolution is the smallest 
distance between two points on a sample that can still be seen as separate 
entities. It is a measure of the microscope's ability to resolve small details 
in an image.

### Magnification

Magnification describes how much larger an object appears through the microscope 
vs its actual size e.g. 10x larger, 100x larger...

$$
\large \text{Magnification} = 
\frac{\text{Size of object in microscopy image}}{\text{True size of object}} 
$$

Note that this is not the same as spatial resolution! Magnification just 
describes how large an object appears, not the size of the details it can 
resolve. For example, a particular light microscope may have a maximum spatial 
resolution of one micrometre - meaning that it won't be able to discern features 
less than this distance apart. It may be possible to magnify images far beyond 
this limit though, making them appear larger and larger without allowing us to 
see any more detail. This is known as 'empty magnification' and should be 
avoided.

### Pixel size

We discussed pixel size in the [filetypes and metadata episode
](filetypes-and-metadata.md#pixel-size), but let's recap here. The pixel size 
states how large a single image pixel is in physical units i.e. 'real world' 
units of measurement like micrometre, or millimetre. 

Note again that this is not the same as the spatial resolution! The pixel size 
helps us understand how large a region each pixel of our image covers, but (as 
with magnification) it doesn't tell us the size of details the microscope is 
really capable of resolving.  For example, I could process a microscopy image 
to artificially give it 4x as many pixels as the original. This would reduce the 
pixel size without allowing us to see any smaller details i.e. there's no 
corresponding improvement in spatial resolution!


::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge 

## Pixel size vs resolution

Consider the 16x16 pixel image below of a circle. If the pixel size in x/y is 
1.5 micrometre:

- How wide is the circle (in micrometre)?
- How wide is the entire image (in micrometre)?
- If the circle is displayed as 9cm wide, then what is the magnification?


![](fig/pixel-size-magnification-exercise-1.png){alt="A 16x16 image of a 
grayscale circle. The background is light gray, with the circle as dark gray - 
the circle is 12 pixels wide." width="70%"}

Below is a downsampled version of the same image (now 8x8 pixels).

- What is the new pixel size (in micrometre)?
- How wide is the circle (in micrometre)?
- How wide is the entire image (in micrometre)?
- If the circle is displayed as 9cm wide, then what is the magnification?

![](fig/pixel-size-magnification-exercise-2.png){alt="An 8x8 image of a 
grayscale circle. The circle is now 6 pixels wide." width="70%"}

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution 

### Solution

### 16x16 image

The circle is 12 pixels wide, which means it is (12 x 1.5) = 18 micrometre wide

The entire image is 16 pixels wide, which means it is (16 x 1.5) = 24 micrometre 
wide

9cm is equivalent to 90,000 micrometre. The magnification is therefore 90,000 
(the displayed size) divided by 18 micrometre (the actual size) = 5000x

### 8x8 image

The image still covers the same total area, but has been downsampled 2x. This 
means the pixel size will be doubled to 3 micrometre.

As this is an image of the exact same circle as the 16x16 image, the circle 
width is unchanged. In this image it is 6 pixels wide, which means it is 
(6 x 3) = 18 micrometre wide (the same as above).

Again, the image still covers the same total area, so its total width will be 
unchanged too. Here, it's 8 pixels wide, which means it is 
(8 x 3) = 24 micrometre wide.

The magnification is also unchanged in this case. Magnification depends on the 
size of an object in the displayed image vs its actual size. If it is still 
displayed at 9cm wide, then the result will be the same, 5000x.


:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

### Choosing magnification, spatial resolution and pixel size

Now that we understand the difference between magnification, resolution and 
pixel size - how do we go about choosing their values for our experiments? 

The most important thing is to only use the level of resolution that you really 
require to answer your research question. For example, say you were researching 
the width of different skin layers using tissue sections on slides. You could 
image this at extremely high resolution, to resolve individual cells and nuclei, 
but this wouldn't really be needed to answer the research question. The width of 
the larger layers could be seen at much lower resolution, allowing you to image 
a larger area faster, while also keeping your data size as small as possible. 
Don't increase your resolution without a good reason!  

[As discussed above](#spatial-resolution), a number of factors affect the 
spatial resolution - but one of the most important is your choice of objective 
lens. Each microscope will usually have a selection of objective lenses 
available (each with a different magnification and numerical aperture (NA)). In 
general, higher NA lenses (which provide a higher spatial resolution) will also 
provide higher levels of magnification. Choose the lowest NA/magnification 
objective that still provides enough spatial resolution to resolve the smallest 
structure you want to be able to see and measure. Table 1 of [Jonkman et al.'s 
2020 paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41596-020-0313-9) provides a nice 
summary of some common objective lenses.

The pixel size of your final image should be matched appropriately to your 
chosen objective lens (and therefore the spatial resolution/magnification used). 
This is usually set to satisfy 'Nyquist sampling' which states that the pixel 
size should be two to three times smaller than the smallest feature you want to 
capture in your images. Let's look at a quick example of why this is necessary. 

Consider the diagram below - on the left is shown two round cells (blue) that 
have a diameter of 10 micrometre and are overlaid by a pixel grid with the same 
spacing. On the right is shown the equivalent final image, using a rough 
grayscale colourmap (black = 0, white = maximum).

![](fig/nyquist-1.png){alt="Left - a diagram of two round cells (blue, 10 
micrometre wide) overlaid by a perfectly aligned 10 micrometre pixel grid. 
Right - the equivalent image with a grayscale colormap - the cells are displayed 
as two separate, white squares." width="80%"}

When the cells lie at the centre of each pixel, we can easily detect them as 
separate objects in our final image. The issue comes when the cells are offset 
from the pixel grid - which will happen very regularly in a real life scenario! 
Keeping the same 10 micrometre spacing, but offsetting the grid slightly results 
in a final image where where we can no longer separate the two cells:

![](fig/nyquist-2.png){alt="Left - a diagram of two round cells (blue, 10 
micrometre wide) overlaid by a misaligned 10 micrometre pixel grid. 
Right - the equivalent image with a grayscale colormap - the cells appear as a 
continuous gray line and can't be separated." width="80%"}

Only by decreasing the pixel size (e.g. to 5 micrometre) can we be sure to 
capture the two cells, no matter their alignment with the grid:

![](fig/nyquist-3.png){alt="Left - a diagram of two round cells (blue, 10 
micrometre wide) overlaid by a 5 micrometre pixel grid. 
Right - the equivalent image with a grayscale colormap - the cells are displayed 
as two separate, gray squares." width="80%"}

Failing to meet the Nyquist critera can also result in various image artifacts 
known as 'aliasing'. For example, consider the digram below - here we have 6 
small cells (blue) that are evenly spaced in the x direction. Using a pixel 
spacing of 10 micrometre, this produces an odd effect in our final image, where 
we see a repeating pattern that is much wider than the real spacing of our cells.

![](fig/aliasing.png){alt="Top - a diagram of six round cells (blue, 5 
micrometre wide) overlaid by a misaligned 10 micrometre pixel grid. 
Bottom - the equivalent image with a grayscale colormap - the cells appear as a 
line of alternating 20 micrometre wide gray and white rectangles (4 in total)." 
width="80%"}

This is an example of aliasing where a high frequency detail in the image (the 
repeating pattern of small cells) is aliased to give a false lower frequency 
pattern. Aliasing and Nyquist sampling are important considerations for all 
fields where an analog signal is converted to a digital one - for example, 
digital audio and video, as well as images.

Most acquisition software will automatically provide sensible defaults that meet 
the Nyquist criteria (taking into account the configuration of your microscope 
and other acquisition settings). For example, for a laser scanning confocal, 
this will adjust the z-step used and the x/y spacing of points sampled with the 
laser. The main point is to avoid:

- Undersampling: Our pixel size is too large to accurately preserve the spatial 
resolution in the resulting digital image (i.e. we haven't achieved Nyquist 
sampling)

- Oversampling: Our pixel size is too small, exceeding that required for Nyquist 
sampling. This results in larger images, with far more pixels, without providing 
any extra useful spatial information.

## Initial quality control

While acquiring your images, it's good to keep an eye on the image histogram to 
ensure your images are good quality. Most light microscope's acquisition 
software will allow you to view a histogram in real time while imaging your 
sample. Recall from the [image display episode](image-display.md) that 
histograms provide a quick summary of pixel values in an image. This summary is 
a useful guide to help us adjust acquisition settings like exposure time / dwell 
time and laser power. 

In an ideal scenario, we want our histogram to show pixel values over most of 
the possible intensity range. For example, for an 8-bit image, spread over most 
of the range from 0 (minimum) to 255 (maximum). This will ensure we are 
capturing as much information as possible about our sample, and giving ourselves 
the best chance of distinguishing features that only differ slightly in their 
brightness. The exercise below covers more features to look for in your image 
histograms, with more details in the exercise solution.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge 

## Image histogram quality control

Look at the example 8-bit image histograms below. For each:

- Does it represent a good quality image, with an appropriate range of pixel 
values?

- If not, how might you adjust your acquisition settings to improve it?

![](fig/exercise-qc-histograms.png){alt="Four 
image histograms labelled a-d, with an x axis from 0-255. a - a thin peak 
between 50-100. b - a broad peak between 0-255. c - a low, broad peak from 
~150-254, with a very tall peak at 255. d - two peaks, one from 25-75 and the 
other from 75-250. The first is higher than the second."}

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution 

### Solution

### a

This image is 'underexposed' meaning its pixel values are clustered at low 
intensity values, without using much of the intensity range. As it uses such a 
small range of pixel values, it will be difficult to distinguish features of 
similar brightness.

It could be improved by increasing the amount of light collected - e.g. 
increasing the exposure time / dwell time or increasing light/laser power.

### b

This image is exposed well - it has pixel values spread throughout most of the 
range from 0-255.

### c

This image is 'overexposed' meaning its pixel values are clustered at high 
intensity values. It also shows 'clipping' (also known as 'saturation'), as 
shown by the very tall peak at the right hand side of the histogram. Clipping 
means that some pixels are recording light above the maximum limit for the 
image (in this case 255). As no values beyond this limit can be recorded, they 
are all 'clipped' to the maximum value, resulting in the abnormally high peak 
you can see here. Clipping means that information is being irretrievably lost 
and should be avoided!

It could be improved by reducing the amount of light collected - e.g. reducing 
exposure time / dwell time or decreasing light/laser power.

### d

This image is exposed well - it has pixel values spread throughout most of the 
range from 0-255. Note that you will often have image histograms with multiple 
peaks e.g. a low intensity one for the background and a high intensity one for 
labelled cells. 

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::


::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints 

- Choosing acquisition settings is a trade-off between many factors including:
spatial resolution, temporal resolution, field of view, data size, 
light exposure and signal to noise ratio.

- Signal to noise ratio is a useful measure of image quality.

- Magnification describes how much larger an object appears through the 
microscope vs its actual size. This is not the same as the spatial resolution!

- Pixel size states how large a single image pixel is in physical units e.g. 
micrometre. Again, this is not the same as spatial resolution.

- Image histograms are a useful quality control measure during acquisition. In 
general, we want our histogram to show pixel values spread over most of the 
possible intensity range.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

